<header class="section__header">
  <h3 class="heading" id="yume-nikki">Yume Nikki</h3>

  <ul class="list">
    <li class="list__item">
      <a href="http://yume-nikki.com/">official website</a>
    </li>
    <li class="list__item">
      <a href="https://yumenikki.fandom.com/wiki/Yume_Nikki_Wiki"
        >fan wiki</a
      >
    </li>
    <li class="list__item">
      <a href="https://www3.nns.ne.jp/~tk-mto/index.html"
        >KIKIYAMA's website (in Japanese)</a
      >
    </li>
  </ul>

  <marquee class="marquee" direction="right">
    <img
      class=""
      src="/_assets/img/shrines/rpg-maker/Madotsuki_walk_side_big.webp"
      alt=""
      width="100px"
    />
  </marquee>
</header>

it's truly difficult to put into words anything that hasn't been said before
about this game. i think the easiest and only complete way to get a sense of it
is to simply
[experience it for yourself](https://yumenikki.fandom.com/wiki/Yume_Nikki#Yume_Nikki).

<cite>Yume Nikki</cite> seemed to have just popped suddenly into existence in
2004, its last official update happening about 3 years later with little heard
from the game's elusive developer, KIKIYAMA, since. and i think the mysteries
surrounding <cite>Yume Nikki</cite>'s creator, coupled with its atmosphere and
the subject matter itself, add to the allure and mystique of the game for a lot
of people; by its very nature there are open ends everywhere in almost every
aspect of this game. it's all so fascinating to dig through.

<figure class="figure">
  <img
    class="image figure__image"
    src="/_assets/img/shrines/rpg-maker/yume-nikki-01.gif"
    alt=""
  />
  <figcaption class="figure__caption">
    entering the bed at the beginning of the game
  </figcaption>
</figure>

at first glance it might be unclear why this game has the impact that it does on
people. when i tell my uninitiated friends about <cite>Yume Nikki</cite> i tell
them that it's a game about walking around and exploring a dream world, _and
that's it_. i make sure to explicitly say that there is no "goal" in the
traditional sense, save for collecting all the "effects" scattered around the
world and subsequently achieving the ending ("ending"), which are both entirely
optional. but, to me, that's _why_ <cite>Yume Nikki</cite> is so special and why
it's achieved the devoted following that it has. there's a particularly unique
blend of emotions derived from the game's aimlessness: some parts comforting,
some uneasy; some parts familiar, some totally alien. there's so much that's
unexplained but that you know must mean _something_, right? like you've been
dropped into somebody's subconscious (and, in a way, you have).

that open-endedness and lack of direction lends itself to being a deeply
personal experience for each person that plays it, and is why i personally would
recommend playing it completely blind, at least for the first time. people
discover areas in different orders, find things in different ways, interpret
things differently. it's a joy watching somebody play this game and seeing how
much their experience differs from yours. it almost acts like a Rorschach test
in a way: what you take away from it is individual to your subjective
experiences; different things will imprint more onto different people. there's a
number of
[fan theories](https://yumenikki.fandom.com/wiki/Theories#Theories_regarding_Locations)
regarding what exactly is happening and what is trying to be said, if anything,
sprouting from recurring bits of imagery and general themes that people have
picked up on.

<figure class="figure">
  <img
    class="image figure__image"
    src="/_assets/img/shrines/rpg-maker/yume-nikki-06.gif"
    alt=""
  />
  <img
    class="image figure__image"
    src="/_assets/img/shrines/rpg-maker/yume-nikki-07.gif"
    alt=""
  />
  <figcaption class="figure__caption">
    walking around in the "Number World"
  </figcaption>
</figure>

because of some of these popular interpretations, and also its mostly bleak
presentation, i feel like <cite>Yume Nikki</cite> gets
[misconstrued as a horror game often](https://www.pcgamer.com/the-horrifying-legacy-of-yume-nikki-the-homebrew-game-that-became-a-phenomenon/).
it certainly isn't the most optimistic game, at least at a surface level:
there's a heavy weight of isolation following you as you explore this desolate
dreamscape on your own, areas like the "Number World" that feel almost hostile,
and moments that can be
[genuinely unsettling](https://youtu.be/_MNFbZ0132M?si=-Xg8-0w3fEllsJtT&t=22)
(mention FACE to a fan and they'll know what you mean), but to label it as
"horror" feels like a huge undercut, in my opinion. <cite>Yume Nikki</cite> can
be scary in the same way it can be scary to be alone with your own thoughts; the
frightening aspects are less The Point of the game and more like a natural
outcome to its surreal, free associative nature. whatever fear you might derive
from it might just stem from your own personal ones.

---

to me, <cite>Yume Nikki</cite> instead embodies a strange kind of comfort that's
hard to articulate. i played it during a particularly vulnerable time and it was
an experience that was, i guess, healing in a way; something about having an
entire world to explore at my own pace with nothing expected of me, the
isolation feeling more familiar than uncomfortable. there were a few moments
that caught me off guard with how resonant they were.

<figure class="figure">
  <figure>
    <img
      class="image figure__image"
      src="/_assets/img/shrines/rpg-maker/yume-nikki-02.gif"
      alt=""
    />
    <figcaption class="figure__caption">
      entering the "Dark Woods"
    </figcaption>
  </figure>
  <figure>
    <img
      class="image figure__image"
      src="/_assets/img/shrines/rpg-maker/yume-nikki-03.gif"
      alt=""
    />
    <figcaption class="figure__caption">
      discovering a train car
    </figcaption>
  </figure>
</figure>

so there's this area of some forest you can find that's almost pitch black, eyes
peeking out from deep in the trees that follow your movements. a winding pathway
is the only thing here, and upon following it you're led to this shady area with
a lone train car. you're able to enter it, and when you do the murky ambiance
that's been following you around stops immediately, leaving behind just the
rhythm of the train as it moves (well, supposedly, as you'll see).
<span id="inside-train-car">inside the train car are empty seats, bar for one
taken by a dark, red-eyed creature:</span>

<figure class="figure">
  <img
    class="image figure__image"
    src="/_assets/img/shrines/rpg-maker/yume-nikki-04.gif"
    alt=""
    aria-describedby="inside-train-car"
  />
</figure>

there's something a bit sad about this little guy, like they've been sitting
there for as long as this train has been there. counterintuitively, leaving now
doesn't do anything, you'd find yourself still in the bleak forest you arrived
in. it's only when you find a seat&mdash;maybe give this guy some
company&mdash;and sit still for a bit, taking in this weird little moment, where
you find yourself somewhere new upon leaving.

<figure class="figure">
  <img
    class="image figure__image"
    src="/_assets/img/shrines/rpg-maker/yume-nikki-05.gif"
    alt=""
  />
  <figcaption class="figure__caption">
    sitting next to the creature, waiting for the train car's
    destination
  </figcaption>
</figure>

maybe that whole sequence was inconsequential to you, but i found myself
strangely moved by it; it's one of the rare moments in this game where you're
able to mask the isolation for a bit, spend some time around some other entity
that isn't just mindlessly walking about for a brief moment of comfortable
silence. but, for as long as you can stay here, you do eventually have to
leave&mdash;you'll wake up some time anyway.

i had many other moments like that struck me in much of the same way: flying
carelessly through the clouds above a mall, the lighthearted melody upon
entering a digital-styled world, watching over a distant city from a garden in
the sky, but i'll leave those for you to discover.

---

just a few years after its initial release <cite>Yume Nikki</cite> rapidly
became a niche cult classic on the internet, and lately i've seen an increase in
interest as the culture around "liminal spaces" continues to grow. it was so
unlike anything else, and still is to an extent. the only other comparable piece
of media i can think of is
[<cite>LSD: Dream Emulator</cite>](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/LSD:_Dream_Emulator)
, which was released exclusively in Japan about half a decade earlier for the
Playstation. let's keep in mind that this was developed in <cite>RPG Maker
2003</cite>, an engine, understandably, known for making, well, traditional RPG
games! so things like a turn-based battle system, maybe a party, a _plot_, were
what was expected from a game made with this engine. <cite>Yume Nikki</cite>
came along and swept all of those conventions to the side in the interest of
artistry and expression.

its unique influence can be seen across the world of indie/underground games
like in other more traditional RPGs such as OMOCAT's <cite>OMORI</cite>,
<cite>Undertale</cite> by Toby Fox (who even managed to
[conduct the first ever interview](https://chartcarr.neocities.org/secretbase_4)
with KIKIYAMA!), and even in completely different genres of game such as Dan
Salvato's
[<cite>Doki Doki Literature Club</cite>](https://www.reddit.com/r/DDLC/comments/7dvb70/comment/dq1dyjb/?utm_source=share&utm_medium=web3x&utm_name=web3xcss&utm_term=1&utm_content=share_button).
<cite>Yume Nikki</cite> has even birthed its own subgenre in a way with the many
[fangames](https://yumenikkifg.fandom.com/wiki/Yume_Nikki_Fangames_Wiki) that
have been made in the years since its release, building atop of the game's
structure and each injecting their own personalities and nuances. my personal
favourite is [<cite>.flow</cite>](https://yume.wiki/flow/Dotflow_Wiki). i might
write about some of those sometime too, we'll see!

i could yammer on for forever about this game, but there are definitely other
games that i hold equally dear that i'd love to share!

<figure class="figure">
  <iframe
    height="315"
    src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/86WZsr-jRDY?si=IIOPIsGLZwLt5rDm"
    title="YouTube video player"
    frameborder="0"
    allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture; web-share"
    referrerpolicy="strict-origin-when-cross-origin"
    allowfullscreen
  ></iframe>
  <figcaption class="figure__caption">
    animator gobou (牛蒡) has many fun <cite>Yume Nikki</cite> animations on
    Youtube!
  </figcaption>
</figure>
